=== Madec & Imbard (1996) - ORCA Grid Specifications ===

=== Page 1 ===
Correspondence to: G. Madec
Climate Dynamics (1996) 12:381–388
q Springer-Verlag 1996
A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
Gurvan Madec, Maurice Imbard
Laboratoire d’Océanographie Dynamique et de Climatologie (CNRS/ORSTOM/UPMC), Université Paris VI, boîte 100, 4, place
Jussieu, 75252 Paris, France
Received: 21 June 1995 / Accepted: 9 November 1995
Abstract. A semi-analytical method is presented for
constructing a global orthogonal curvilinear ocean
mesh which has no singularity point inside the compu-
tational domain since the mesh poles are moved to
land points. The method involves defining an analyti-
cal set of mesh parallels in the stereographic polar
plan, computing the associated set of mesh meridians,
and projecting the resulting mesh onto the sphere. The
set of mesh parallels proposed here is defined as a se-
ries of embedded circles. The resulting mesh presents
no loss of continuity in either the mesh lines or the
scale factors over the whole ocean domain, as the mesh
is not a composite mesh. Thus, the Bering Strait can be
opened without specific treatment. The equator is a
mesh line, which provides a better numerical solution
for equatorial dynamics. The resolution can be easily
controlled through the definition of three analytical
functions which can increase resolution and/or main-
tain a low ratio of anisotropy. The mesh has been im-
plemented in the LODYC general circulation ocean
model. Results of a semi-diagnostic simulation are
shown.
1 Introduction
The Arctic Ocean is an active participant in the global
climate system which influences both its oceanic and
atmospheric components. The sea ice export and fresh
polar surface water outflow regulate the deep convec-
tion in the Nordic Seas (Aagaard and Carmack 1989),
while the deep Arctic water outflow actively contri-
butes to the formation of the North Sea deep water.
All these exchanges ultimately determine the charac-
teristics of the North Atlantic Deep Water and have a
significant impact on the global ocean “conveyor belt”.
Due to the presence of a permanent sea ice cover in-
volving strong positive feedbacks between the atmo-
sphere and the ocean (Herman and Johnson 1980), the
Arctic Ocean is also suspected to play a central role in
the natural variability of the climate system (Mysak et
al. 1990). Model experiments have also shown that it is
quite vulnerable to large climatic changes from in-
creased atmospheric CO2 as a result of positive feed-
backs related to high latitude snow and sea ice (Wash-
ington and Meehl 1986).
The Arctic Ocean stratification plays a crucial role
in maintaining the sea ice cover as well as in controll-
ing the efficiency of the deep water formation on the
shelves. The stratification is itself controlled by the sur-
face fresh water input from river run-off and through
the Bering Strait, and by the warm, salty inflow of At-
lantic water from the Nordic Seas (Rudels 1989). In
particular, the influence of the Bering Strait inflow on
the global ocean circulation has recently been empha-
sized by Reason and Power (1994) in a numerical
study. They show an increase of 8% in the rate of for-
mation of the North Atlantic Deep Water when the
strait is open.
In the development of a global ocean model for cli-
mate purposes as well as for the study of the global
thermohaline circulation, it is therefore important to
include the Arctic Ocean and its connections to the At-
lantic and Pacific Oceans. Unfortunately, the tradition-
al geographical latitude-longitude coordinate system
used in solving the equations of motion in ocean gener-
al circulation models has a singular point in the Arctic
Ocean at the North Pole, where the meridians con-
verge inside the computational domain. The conver-
gence places a severe restriction on the length of the
time step allowed for computational stability of finite
difference schemes. Various solutions have been ad-
vanced to solve this problem. Bryan et al. (1975) ap-
plied a zonal Fourier filter poleward of 457 on the
prognostic fields in order to suppress the shortest
wavelength components. However, this procedure can
generate numerical noise as the non divergent nature
of the flow is not necessarily preserved by the filter
(Bryan 1987). Semtner and Chervin (1988) suppress
the problem by the walling off of the Arctic Ocean at


=== Page 2 ===
382
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
657N latitude. Another solution consists of using a
composite mesh made up of two grids rotated by 907
relative to each other (one mesh’s poles are on the oth-
er grid’s equator) (Deleersnijder et al. 1993; Eby and
Holloway 1994; Gwilliam 1995). One mesh is used for
the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans and the other
for the rest of the world ocean. The Bering Strait is
closed and the two meshes are coupled along a line of
longitude in one mesh and along the equator in the
other. Although this solution solves the North Pole
problem, it still presents two drawbacks. First, the grid
size cannot be continuous across the equator: a small
change in grid size occurs across the equator which can
damage the second order accuracy of the numerical
schemes used in the ocean model (Marti et al. 1992).
However, the effect of such a discontinuity may be
small as suggested by Coward et al. (1994). Second, the
mesh does not link the Pacific Ocean to the Arctic
Ocean continuously, so that a specific treatment must
be developed to open the Bering Strait.
The solution proposed in this study overcomes the
North Pole singularity without these drawbacks, but
requires an ocean model adapted to horizontal ortho-
gonal curvilinear coordinates. It consists of covering
the Earth with a global orthogonal curvilinear mesh in
which the poles (i.e. points of convergence of mesh
line) are located on land. Various methods exist for
constructing such a mesh. Murray (1995) shows that a
number of global orthogonal curvilinear meshes can be
constructed quite simply by analytical means, using the
properties of conformal map projection. However, the
equatorial dynamics is better solved numerically when
the mesh parallels have an east-west alignment at the
equator. This additional requirement makes it neces-
sary to resort to the use of composite meshes, when
using analytical meshes proposed by Murray (1995).
This inevitably results in some loss of continuity of
scale factors (metric coefficients) across the join (Mur-
ray 1995). The method proposed here is a semi-analyti-
cal method which allows global orthogonal curvilinear
meshes to be constructed for which poles are on land
and the equator is a mesh line.
The study is structured as follows: in Sect. 2 the
technique used to defined the global ocean mesh is de-
scribed. In Sect. 3, the choice of the various parameters
is discussed. In the last section the results obtained for
a global ocean model are briefly presented.
2 Construction of the horizontal global mesh
The basic idea of the mesh construction is to define
judiciously an analytical set of mesh parallels. A differ-
ential equation can be derived that must be verified by
the mesh meridians. The numerical solution of this
equation completes the global mesh construction. In
order to simplify both the definition of the mesh paral-
lels and the resolution, it is convenient to work on a
north stereographic polar plan rather than on a sphere.
Indeed, since the stereographic polar projection is a
conformal transformation, the projection on the sphere
Fig. 1. In the stereographic polar plan (Ox,Oy), the mesh paral-
lels L(j) are a series of embedded circles which have the same
centre O outside L(jeq) and which have centres that continuously
move along the y-axis from O to Mnp inside L(jeq). Starting from
point M0(i) defined by the angle h(i), a mesh meridian G(i) is
computed as the curve which intercepts each circle L(j) at right
angles
of an orthogonal mesh defined on this plan is also an
orthogonal mesh. The problem can thus be reduced to
a two-dimensional problem of defining an analytical
set of mesh parallels and computing the corresponding
mesh meridians on the stereographic polar plan.
Let the horizontal ocean mesh be defined by the I-
and J-curves, the mesh meridians and parallels, respec-
tively. IM and JM are the number of I- and J-curves
covering the global mesh, and Jeq is the number of J-
curves in the Southern Hemisphere. Let (Ox, Oy) be a
Cartesian coordinate system on the north stereograph-
ic polar plan such that O and the unity circle are the
stereographic polar projection of the North Pole and
the equator, respectively (Fig. 1).
2.1 The choice of J-curves
The J-curves are defined as a series of embedded cir-
cles which have the same centre O in the Southern
Hemisphere (i.e. outside the unity circle) and which
have centres that continuously move along the y-axis
from O to Mnp (the mesh North Pole) in the Northern
Hemisphere (i.e. inside the unity circle) (Fig. 1). This
series of circles L(j) is defined for both hemispheres by
the following equation:
L(j):x2cy2P(f(j)cg(j))ycf(j)g(j)p0 jB[1,JM]
(1)
where f and g are the functions which give the ordinate
of the two intersections between L(j) and the y-axis. f
and g verify the following properties:
f and g are continuous and differentiable at least
twice
(a)
f is strictly increasing and g is strictly decreasing with
increasing j
(b)
f(JM)pg(JM)
(c)


=== Page 3 ===
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
383
f(Jeq)pP1pPg(Jeq)
(d)
f(j)pPg(j)
jB[1,Jeq]
(e)
Conditions (a) and (b) ensure that the circles are strict-
ly embedded and that given a point Mp(x,y) on the
stereographic plan, there exists one and only one
jB[1,JM] which verifies (1); (c) that L(JM) reduces to
a single point, the mesh North Pole Mnp; (d) that L(Jeq)
is the unity circle, so that the equator is a mesh line;
and (e) that outside the unity circle, all the circles are
centred on O (i.e. the Southern Hemisphere configura-
tion is geographical). Note that (e) can be modified to
shift the mesh South Pole. This is a priori not necessary
as the South Pole is already placed near the centre of
the Antarctic continent.
2.2 Computation of the I-curves
The I-curves form a series of curves G(i) which cross
the equatorial circle L(Jeq) at a point M0(i) defined by
the angle (Ox,OM0)ph(i), where h is a given contin-
uous and at least twice differentiable function (Fig. 1).
h describes the I-point distribution along the equator.
The I-curves intercept each circle L(j) at right angles,
i.e. they obey the following differential equation:
dy
dx p 2yP(f(j)cg(j))
2x
(2)
Since j is linked to (x,y) through Eq. (1), an analytical
solution for Eq. (2) is by no means trivial except for
particular expressions of f and g which do not verify all
the properties (a) to (e). For example, when f and g are
linear functions of j, the curves G(i) which are solutions
of Eq. (2) also form a linear series of embedded circles
but the resulting mesh does not have a latitude/longitu-
de configuration in the Southern Hemisphere. Howev-
er, Eq. (2) can be solved numerically with a very high
precision to find the I-curves. The algorithm used to
compute the pairs (x(i,j), y(i,j)) is presented in the ap-
pendix. The geographical coordinates of all the mesh
points on the sphere are then obtained by applying the
inverse of the stereographic polar projection:
l(i,j)p 1807
p
arctan1
y(i,j)
x(i,j)2
w(i,j)p907P 3607
p
arctan(;x2(i,j)cy2(i,j))
(3)
In order to complete the mesh computation, we
have to evaluate the scale factors (i.e. the rate of defor-
mation of the mesh or grid spacing) in the two horizon-
tal directions. These scale factors e1 and e2 are given
by:
e1pa31
il
ii cosw2
2
c1
iw
ii2
24
1/2
e2pa31
il
ij cosw2
2
c1
iw
ij2
24
1/2
(4)
where a is the Earth’s radius. The partial derivative of
l and w with respect to i and j are computed using a
fourth order centred finite difference scheme. A suffi-
cient precision is reached for this computation by using
a mesh which is one hundred times smaller than the
mesh required. We verify the overall precision of the
above mesh computation in the case of linear f and g
functions where an analytical solution is known, and in
the general case, by computing a mesh that was one
thousand times smaller than the required one. In both
cases, the accuracy of the mesh point positions and of
the scale factors was found to be smaller than 10P5 m,
that is a relative precision smaller than 10P10.
3 Choice of a global ocean mesh
The technique presented in the previous section allows
the definition of various global ocean meshes, depend-
ing on the mesh North Pole position (Mnp) and the
functions f, g and h chosen. The expected resolution
will serve as guideline between the different choices.
Here, we want to define a world ocean model to study
the seasonal to decadal variability of the ocean with
special attention devoted to the tropical interannual
variability. The model resolution must be a reasonable
compromise between ocean physics and computational
resources. This leads, for the Southern Hemiphere, to
a zonal grid spacing of 27, and to a meridional grid
spacing of 1.57 at mid-latitudes decreasing to 0.57 in the
equatorial strip. For the Northern Hemisphere, the
mesh characteristics must be similar, in particular the
scale factors must not be smaller than in the Southern
Hemisphere, otherwise it would result in a more re-
strictive CFL criterion. Therefore, the mesh North
Pole has been set at 407N and 907E, i.e. over China.
This is as far as possible from the geographical North
Pole while being not too close to an oceanic area. The
choice of h is straightforward and corresponds to a uni-
form 27 grid spacing along the equator:
h(i)p2i
1^i^IM
(5)
where h is expressed in degrees and IMp180.
For f and g, the analytical expression is somewhat
more complicated. We found it convenient to define fb
and gb, the first derivative of f and g, as linear combi-
nations of hyperbolic tangents plus a constant (Fig. 2),
so that the grid spacing can be rather easily adjusted to
the desired values. f and g expressed in degrees, take
the following form:
f(j)pA0jcA1
cB0log[cosh[(jPJeqPJB)/B1]/cosh[(jPJeqcJB)/B1]]
(6a)
PC0log[cosh[(jPJeqPJC)/C1]/cosh[(jPJeqcJC)/C1]]
for 1^j^Jeq
g(j)pf(j)
for Jeq^j^JM g(j)pD0jcD1
(6b)
PE0log[cosh[(jPJeqPJE)/E1]/cosh[(jPJeqcJE)/E1]]
The first (second) logarithmic term of Eq. (6a) is re-
sponsible for a symmetrie change with respect to the


=== Page 4 ===
384
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
Fig. 2. Meridian scale factor e2 as a function of the mesh parallel
index J. Each curve is associated with an integer value of the
mesh meridian index I. The envelope of these curves (Ip1 and
Ip90) gives the first derivative of g and f
equator in the grid spacing between the equator and
mid-latitudes (mid-latitudes and polar regions) (Fig. 2).
The logarithmic term of Eq. (6b) is responsible for the
decrease of the grid spacing northward of 307N, over
Asia (Fig. 2) which allows the grid pole to be at 407N.
The choice of the 15 coefficients in Eqs. (6a) and (6b)
is as follows. We first set the number of grid points in
the north-south direction and the index of the equator:
JMp150 and Jeqp64. Then, we choose B1p10., JBp14
and B0p0.52 B1/tanh[JB/B1] which means that the var-
iation of fb from its equatorial value to its mid-latitude
value occurs over 10 points at the 14th point on both
sides of the equator point, and with an amplitude of
2!0.52p1.047. Similarly, we choose C1p8., JCp65
and C0p0.25 C1/tanh[JC/C1] for the variation of fb
over polar regions. A0 and A1 are then specified such
that fb(Jeq)p0.57 and f(Jeq)p07, which leads to
A0p0.5c2!0.52P2!0.25p1.047 and A1pPA0Jeq.
A similar procedure is used for g. We set E1p8. and
JEp65 and choose E0 such that gb varies from 0.57 at
the equator to a minimum value of 10P2 at jpJM. This
last condition ensures that gb is strictly positive
(gb`0), i.e. the property (a) is satisfied. It leads to the
following expression for E0:
E0p(0.5P10P2)/E1/(2 tanh[JE/E1]
Ptanh[(JMPJeqPJE)/E1]ctanh[(JMPJeqcJE)/E1])
The value of D0 and D1 are then specified such that
gb(Jeq)p0.57 
and 
g(Jeq)p07, 
which 
leads 
to
D0p0.5P2E0 tanh(JE/E1)/E1 and D1pPD0Jeq.
Using these coefficients, f and g satisfy (a) to (e),
apart from (c). For this last property, they can always
be extended toward the mesh North Pole while verify-
ing the other required properties. However this part of
the mesh is on a continent, i.e. out of the computation-
al domain, so that it is not required.
Using the above functions and mesh North Pole po-
sition and the numerical procedure described in the
previous paragraph, a global ocean mesh has been
Fig. 3. a Unmasked and b masked world ocean mesh and c ste-
reographic north polar projection of the world ocean mesh. Only
one mesh parallel and meridian in three are shown
computed. Its ocean/land masked stereographic north
polar projection is shown in Fig. 3. The associated
masked scale factors and ratio of anisotropy,
Ripmax(e1/e2,e2/e1), are shown in Fig. 4. The mesh has
180!150 grid points. The minimum value of the scale
factors, 50 km, is reached in the Kara and Weddell
Seas. The ratio of anisotropy is maximum at the equa-


=== Page 5 ===
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
385
Fig. 4. a Horizontal scale factors e1 and b e2 of the world ocean
mesh and c the associated ratio of anisotropy, Ripmax(e1/e2,e2/
e1). The contour interval is 10 km in a and b, and 0.25 in c
tor where it is equal to 4 (27!0.57). It slowly decreases
to 1 at mid-latitudes and then increases poleward to 3
at the end of the Kara and Weddell Seas. This ratio
remains below its equatorial value because of the de-
crease of fb in polar regions.
4 Results of the global ocean model
The mesh described in the previous section has been
used in the Laboratoire d’Océanographie Dynamique
et de Climatologie (LODYC) primitive equation ocean
general cirulation model (Delecluse et al. 1993) to si-
mulate the global ocean circulation associated with the
thermodynamic fields of Levitus (1982). The limiting
factor for the time step is not the smallness of the scale
factors, but the value reached by the Coriolis parame-
ter at the North Pole. Indeed, the time step must verify
2pfDt^1 which leads to a maximum time step of 1 h
55 min. As the time discretization of the Coriolis term
is explicit in the model, this is the most restrictive con-
Fig. 5. Model level depth(thick line) and associated vertical scale
factors (dashed line)
straint on the time step which has led us to choose a
model time step of 1 h 40 min.
In the vertical, the placement of vertical velocity
and temperature levels is defined from an analytic ex-
pression of the depth z(k) whose derivative provides
the vertical scale factor e3(k)piz/ik (Marti et al.
1992). The following function has been chosen:
z(k)ph0Ph1kPh2h3log3cosh1
kPh4
h3 24
(7)
where kp1 to KM for vertical velocity levels and
kp1c1/2 to KMc1/2 for temperature levels. Such an
expression allows us to define a nearly uniform place-
ment of levels at the ocean top and bottom with a
smooth hyperbolic tangent transition in between (Fig.
5). Here we have chosen a 10 m (500 m) resolution in
the surface (bottom) layers and a depth which varies
from 0 at the sea surface to a minimum of P5000 m.
This leads to the following conditions:
e3(1c1/2)p10.
e3(KMP1/2)p500.
zp0.
z(KM)pP5000.
(8)
The five coefficients h0 to h4 in Eq. (7) are determined
such that Eq. (8) is satisfied. To do so, we first made an
arbitrary choice of KM and h3, here KMp31 and
h3p3. Using the first three conditions in Eq. (8), we
express h0 h1 and h2 as a function of h4, and then we
determine h4B[1,KM] using a bisection method such
that the last condition in Eq. (8) is satisfied. In the
present case this leads to the following values:
h0p4762.96, h1p255.58, h2p245.58, and h4p21.43.
The resulting depths and scale factors as a function of
the model levels are shown in Fig. 5.
The global model has eleven islands: Antarctica,
America, Cuba, Madagascar, Philippines, Borneo, New


=== Page 6 ===
386
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
Fig. 6. a Annual mean barotropic stream function associated with
the vertically integrated horizontal circulation and b zoom-in of
the stream function over the Arctic ocean. The contour interval is
10 and 1 Sverdrup, respectively. The numbers indicate the mass
transport in Sverdrup through the different Arctic straits
Guinea, Australia, New Zealand, Iceland and Spitz-
bergen. Non-zero depth-integrated circulation is per-
mitted around each island. The bottom topography
field is derived from the 5b!5b ETOPO5 (1986) aver-
aged over each model tracer grid box. A minimum
depth for the ocean continental shelf has been set to 3
levels (F30 m) and a maximum depth to 5000 m. Fi-
nally, no smoothing operator has been applied on the
resulting bathymetry, but alterations were made by
hand to improve representation of major ridges and
sills. In particular, a width of at least two tracer grid
points has been imposed on straits and deep channels.
This constraint is motivated by the discrete expression
of the geostrophic balance which requires the defini-
tion of a pressure gradient across the straits and chan-
nels.
Horizontal eddy viscosity and diffusivity coefficients
were set to 4 104 m2 sP1 and 2 103 m2 sP1, respectively,
while the vertical ones are computed from a 1.5 turbu-
lent closure model (Blanke and Delecluse 1993). The
model was forced with monthly Hellerman and Rosen-
stein (1983) wind stress and Esbensen and Kushnir
(1981) heat flux climatology plus a 12 day relaxation
toward surface time varying temperature and salinity
data of Levitus (1982). The integration was started
with January Levitus (1982) data and pursued over a
20 year period with an interior relaxation to the
monthly mean temperature and seasonal mean salinity
of Levitus (1982) with a relaxation time scale of 50
days in the upper 800 m and 1 year in the deep
ocean.
To give an exhaustive description of the simulated
dynamics is beyond the scope of this study. A brief
presentation of the annual mean circulation integrated
either vertically or zonally is preferred to highlight the
simulation behaviour. The annual mean barotropic
stream function (BSF) associated with the vertically in-
tegrated horizontal circulation is shown in Fig. 6a. In
middle and low latitudes and away from the western
boundaries and straits, the BSF almost reflects the
Sverdrup transport derived from wind stress. The mag-
nitude of tropical and sub-tropical gyres is similar to
those obtained in other global models using the same
wind product (see for example Semtner and Chervin
1992). A zoom in the BSF field over the Arctic Ocean
given in Fig. 6b emphasizes the importance of the flow
through the Bering Strait on the Arctic circulation. Al-
though the low model resolution in this region
(F110 km, Fig. 3c) leads us to a widening of the Ber-
ing Strait from 85 to 220 km (two temperature and vel-
ocity grid points) with an adequate depth of 40 m,
about 0.95 Sv (1 Svp10P6 m3 sP1) enters the Arctic
Ocean through the Bering Strait in good agreement
with observations (Coachman and Aagaard 1988). This
is only three times less than the net inflow west of Ice-
land (3.4 Sv) and allows the Denmark Strait net out-
flow to be 22% higher (4.35 Sv).
Figure 7 shows the annual mean meridional stream
function (MSF) associated with the zonally integrated
meridional circulation both for the global circulation
(Fig. 7a) and for the circulation only in the Atlantic
(Fig. 7b). The computation of these MSF is not
straightforward as the mesh does not follow the longi-
tudes in the Northern Hemisphere. MSF is deduced
from a meridional flow which is computed for a given
latitude as the flow that crosses a broken line which
follows the faces of the mesh cells and is as close as
possible to that latitude. The broken lines used for the
North Atlantic MSF computation are shown in Fig. 8.
This solution has been preferred to an interpolation of
the velocity fields onto a geographic mesh before the
computation. Indeed, such an interpolation introduces
errors in the velocity, field which is no longer non-div-
ergent, and thus the resulting MSF indicates a trans-
port of water through the ocean floor or surface, de-
pending on the direction of integration (Eby and Hol-
loway 1994). The general features of both Atlantic and
global MSF are similar to those obtained in other glo-
bal models. No problem occurs that could be related to
the stretched mesh used. Such a mesh appears to be
well suited to the simulation of the global ocean circu-
lation.
5 Conclusion
A semi-analytical method has been developed to con-
struct a global orthogonal curvilinear ocean mesh. It


=== Page 7 ===
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
387
Fig. 7a, b. Annual mean meridional stream function associated
with the zonally integrated meridional circulation for a the global
circulation and b the circulation only in the Atlantic. The contour
interval is 5 and 2.5 Sverdrup, respectively
Fig. 8. The broken lines used for the North Atlantic meridional
stream function computation. One line in three is shown
consists in defining an analytical set of mesh parallels
on a stereographic polar plan, then deriving and solv-
ing a differential equation to compute the associated
set of mesh meridians, and eventually projecting the
resulting mesh onto the sphere. The set of mesh paral-
lels used here has been defined as a series of embed-
ded circles. It provides a world ocean mesh which has
the following properties: (1) the mesh has no singulari-
ty point inside the computational domain as the mesh
North Pole has been shifted onto land ; (2) no loss of
continuity of either the mesh lines or the scale factors
occurs over the whole ocean domain, as the mesh is
not a composite mesh; (3) the Bering Strait is opened
without specific treatment; (4) the equator is a mesh
line, which provides a better numerical solution for the
equatorial dynamics; and (5) the resolution can be con-
trolled through the definition of three analytical func-
tions to increase resolution and/or to maintain a low
ratio of anisotropy (see the resolution in the equatorial
and Arctic regions). A world ocean model has been
designed using this technique. It gives satisfactory re-
sults and is currently being used both in forced (Madec
1995, personal communication) and coupled mode
(Guilyardi et al. 1995).
The method can be applied to any other set of mesh
parallels that are defined analytically, so that a differ-
ential equation can be derived and solved to find the
mesh meridian. For example, a solution that exhibits
similar properties to the one presented here is sug-
gested from Murray’s (1995) work. The set of mesh pa-
rallels can be defined as a series of embedded ellipses
starting from the equatorial circle (or any other chosen
latitude circle) and converging toward confocal ellipses
whose focals are set onto North America and Russia,
respectively.
Acknowledgements. Support for computation has been provided
by the Institut de Recherche en Informatique Scientifique
(IDRIS) of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS).
Appendix: Numerical computation of I-curves
Outside the unity circle, the I-curves are half-rays, so
that no computational effort is required to solve the
differential Eq. (2). Inside the unity circle, Eq. (2) is
solved starting from the point M0(i) using a constant
grid spacing Dxpcos(h(i))/N (where N is the number
of space steps), by the following algorithm:
– initialization:
(x0,y0)p(cos[h(i)], sin[h(i)])
x1px0PDx
(A1)
ybpy0PDx1
dy
dx2
0
py0PDxtan[h(i)]
– for np1 to N:
First, the index jn of the circle L which goes through
Mnp(xnyn) is determined. This index is the solution of
Eq. (1) for (yn, yn). The existence and uniqueness of jn
is established by (a) and (b). The index is found at the
machine precision by a method of bisection. Then,
ync1 can be computed using a second order centred
finite difference approximation of Eq. (2):


=== Page 8 ===
388
Madec and Imbard: A global ocean mesh to overcome the North Pole singularity
xnc1pxnPDx
ync1pynP1c2Dx 2ynP(f(jn)cg(jn))
2xn
(A2)
Note that a higher order of approximation can be used,
such as fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme, to solve Eq.
(2). The choice is between increasing the accuracy of
the scheme or spending an equivalent amount of extra
computation time in reducing the grid spacing (larger
value of N). The second alternative has been found to
be more advantageous. The above computation allows
each G-curve to be defined by a series of triplets
(xn(i),yn(i),jn(i)), then a fourth order interpolation
scheme is used to find, for each integer value of i, the
coordinates (xn,yn) associated with integer values of j.
This interpolation is done with a high precision as N is
typically set to one hundred times JMPJeq.
References
Aagaard K, Carmark EC (1989) The role of sea ice and other
fresh water in the Arctic circulation. J Geophys Res
94:14485–14498
Blanke B, Delecluse P (1992) Variability of the tropical Atlantic
ocean simulated by a general circulation model with two dif-
ferent mixed layer physics. J Phys Oceanogr 23:1363–1388
Bryan F (1987) Parameter sensitivity of primitive equation ocean
general circulation models. J Phys Oceanogr 17:970–985
Bryan K, Manabe S, Pacanowski RC (1975) A global ocean-
atmosphere climate model. Part II. The oceanic circulation. J
Phys Oceanogr 5:30–46
Coachman LK, Aagaard K (1988) Transports through Bering
Strait: annual and interannual variability. J Geophys Res
93:15535–15539
Coward AC, Killworth PD, Blundell JR (1994) Tests of a two-
grid world ocean model. J Geophys Res 99:22725–22735
Delecluse P, Madec G, Imbard M, Lévy C (1993) OPA version 7
Ocean General Circulation Model reference manual. LO-
DYC, France, Internal Report, 93/05, 111 pp (Available from
Laboratoire d’Océanographie Dynamique et de Climatologie,
Université Paris VI, 75252 Paris, France)
Deleersnijder E, Van Ypersele JP, Campin JM (1993) An ortho-
gonal, curvilinear coordinate system for a world ocean model.
Ocean Modelling 100 (unpublished manuscript)
Eby M, Holloway G (1994) Grid transformation for incorporat-
ing the Arctic in a global ocean model. Clim Dyn 10:241–
247
Esbensen SK, Kushnir Y (1981) The heat budget of the global
ocean: an atlas based on estimates from marine surface obser-
vations. Climatic Resolution Institution, Oregon State, Uni-
versity, Rep 29
ETOPO5 (1986) Global 5b!5b depth and elevation. (Available
from National Geographical Data Center, NOAA, US De-
partment of Commerce, Code E/GC3, Boulder, CO 80303)
Guilyardi E, Madec G, Terray L, Déqué M, Pontaud M, Imbard
M, Stephenson D, Filiberti MA, Cariolle D, Delecluse P,
Thual O (1995) Simulation couplée océan-atmosphère de la
variabilité du climat. C R Acad Sci Paris, 320, Série IIa, 683–
690
Gwilliam CS (1995) The OCCAM Global Ocean Model. In:
Hoffman G-R, Krietz N (eds) Coming of Age (Proc 6th
ECMWF Workshop on the use of parallel processors in me-
teorology), World Scientific
Hellerman S, Rosenstein M (1983) Normal monthly wind stress
over the World Ocean with error estimates. J Phys Oceanogr
13:1093–1104
Herman GF, Johnson WT (1980) The effect of extreme sea ice
variations on the climatology of the Goddard general circula-
tion model. In: Pritchard ED (ed) Sea ice processes and mod-
els. University of Washington, Seattle, pp 207–223
Levitus S (1982) Climatological atlas of the Word Ocean. NOAA
Prof Pap 13, CS Government Printing Office, Washington
D.C.
Marti O, Madec G, Delecluse P (1992) Comment on “net diffu-
sivity in ocean general circulation models with nonuniform
grids” by F. L. Yin and I. Y. Fung. J Geophys Res 97:12763–
12766
Murray RJ (1995) Explicit generation of orthogonal grids for
ocean models. J Comput Phys (accepted)
Mysak LA, Manak DK, Marsden RF (1990) Sea-ice anomalies
observed in the Greenland and Labrador Seas during 1901–
1984 and their relation to an interdecadal Arctic climate cycle.
Clim Dyn 5:111–133
Reason CJC, Power SB (1994) The influence of the Bering Strait
on the circulation in a coarse resolution global ocean model.
Clim Dyn 9:363–369
Rudels B (1989) The formation of polar surface water, the ice
export and the exchanges through Fram Strait. Prog Ocea-
nogr 22:205–248
Semtner AJ, Chervin RM (1988) A simulation of the global
ocean circulation with resolved eddies. J Geophys Res
93:15502–15522
Semtner AJ, Chervin RM (1992) Ocean general circulation from
a global eddy-resolving model. J Geophys Res 97:5493–5550
Washington WM, Meehl GA (1986) General circulation model
CO2 sensitivity experiments: snow-sea ice albedo parameteri-
zation and globally averaged surface air temperature. Clim
Change 8:231–241


